FEATURE ARTICLE: SUMMARIZATION OF THINGS Building Globally Optimized Computational Intelligent Image Processing Algorithm for On-Site Inference of Nitrogen in Plants Estimating nutrient content in plants is crucial task in the application of precis ion farming. This work will be more challenging if it is conducted nondestructively based on plant images captured in the field due to the variation of lighting conditions. This paper proposes computational intelligence image processing to analyze nitrogen status in wheat plants. We developed an ensemble of deep learning multilayer perceptron-using committee machines for color normalization and image segmentation. This paper also focuses on building genetic-algorithm-based global optimizatio to fine tune the color normalization and nitrogen estimation results. We discovered that the proposed method can successfully normalize plant images by reducing color variabilities compared to other color normalization techniques. Furthermore, this al gorithm is able to enhance the nitrogen estimation results compared to other non-gl obal optimization methods as well as the most renowned SPAD meter based nitrogen measurement. Susanto B. Sulistyo Newcastle University W.L. Woo Newcastle University S.S. Dlay Newcastle University Bin Gao University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 15IEEE Intelligent Systems Published by the IEEE Computer SocietyMay/June 2018 IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS Precision farming (PF), also known as site-sp ecific crop management, has been popular issue in agriculture recently. Furthermore, with the upport of recent technologies in sensors and com-puters, the PF technology will be vast ly beneficial to future farming.1 This technology aims to boost crop productivity with fewer production cost and small negative impacts to surroundings. In order to support this technology it is important to estimate the nitrogen stat us of plants to im-prove the efficiency of fertilizer use and prevent over-fertilizing th at will harm the environment. During recent years, image-based analysis to estimate nutrient content in plants has been exten-sively conducted by numerous researchers due to the rapid developments of vision sensing and computational systems. However, most of the image-based nutrient estimation approaches are conducted in controlled environment with artificial lighting systems.2 Such methods are im-practical and time-consumi ng, and they require additional equipm ent. It is challenging task to estimate nutrient content in plants based on the leaf images captured in the field under sunlight due to the variation of light intensities. The ma in problem is how to normalize the plant images by reducing color variability so that the images become more comparable among each other and the nutrient estimation results will be more reliable. In our earlier work,3 an MLP fusion based color normalizati on was developed to tackle the varia-tion of sunlight intensities in wheat plant images However, the work still suffers from several drawbacks where the neural network architecture has not been globally optimized leading to ina-bility to distinguish weeds from wheat plants under the same sunlight intensity. Additionally, the other problem of on-field nitrogen content predic tion is how to remove complex background, for instance weeds, stones, soils, and dry leaves, from wheat leaves as the region of interests. In the current paper, we are focusing on applying genetic algorithm (GA) to establish further fine tuning of the color normalization based on the resu lts of nitrogen content prediction. We also in-vestigate multi-order statistical feature extractio of the normalized plant images and apply them in order to estimate nitrogen content in wheat plants. To achieve these research goals, we devel-oped new method to fuse deep learning multilayer perceptron (DL-MLP) by means of commit-tee machines for color normalization and imag segmentation, and to globally optimize the overall system architecture for hi gh performance of color normalizat ion and nitrogen status esti-mation using GA. Many deep learning methods have been developed by several researchers, such as convolutional neural network (CNN)4 and recurrent neural network (RNN).5 Basically, CNN embeds set of filters into the model, and these filters are typica lly invariant to certain shapes, orientations, and sizes. As such, CNN is useful for extracting independent features in images. These features cor-respond to some common observed patterns (i.e. ba sis representations) in the images. However, these are not the final output of our research. Instead, we developed an approach for extracting several statistical features at various orders from the plant images. Our main goal is to build robust statistical odel for prediction, rather than just recognizing the imag es. Furthermore, RNN is not suitable for our dataset since RNN im poses temporal feedback constraint into the prediction model, which in our problem is not required and in fact may produce bias. FARM EXPERIMENTAL AND CHLOROPHYLL METER BASED NITROGEN ANALYSIS We conducted farm experiment in Nafferton Fa rm, Northumberland, UK to produce and record nitrogen level variations in wheat plants. Three va riations of nitrogen fe rtilizer amounts, i.e. kg/ha (N1), 85 kg/ha (N2), 170 kg/ha (N3) of NH 4NO 3, were applied to field plots with each treatment replicated four times. The nutrient data was collected one week prior to fertilizing as well as two and four weeks after fertilizing.6 We also measured nitrogen content using chloro-phyll meter (Minolta SPAD-502) as comparison. SPAD meter is non-destructive device to determine chlorophyll content in leaf by measuring the absorbance and transmittance of lights with two different wavelengths, i.e. red and in frared lights with peak wavelengths of 650 nm (I650) and 940 nm I940), respectively, through the leaf. 16 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent SUMMARIZATION OF THINGS COMBUSTION METHOD ASED ACTUAL NITROGEN MEASUREMENT The actual nitrogen content was measured using an Elementar Vario Macro Cube. The measure-ment procedure comprises leaf sample collectio n, oven drying, pulverization, and sample burn-ing in the Cube device with certain amount of oxygen. The nitrogen element was then analyzed and percentage figure subsequently obtained. PROPOSED COMPUTATIONAL IMAGE-BASED NITROGEN STATUS ANALYSIS In general, this proposed method can be split into fi ve major steps, as shown in Figure 1, i.e. (i) image acquisition, (ii) color normalization training using an ensemble of deep learning multi-layer perceptron (DL-MLP), (iii) image segmenta tion and feature extraction, (iv) nitrogen esti-mation, and (v) GA-based global optimization. All computational algorithms in this research, including neural networks, image processing, and genetic algorithms, were developed using MATLAB R2012 and the analyses were performed by means of desktop PC with 3.2 GHz Intel Core i5 processor and GB of RAM. Furthermore, the details of each particular work will be described in the following sections. Figure 1. Genetically-enabled ensemble DL-MLP for on-field nitrogen status analysis in plants. Image Acquisition In this research, two types of images were acquire in the field with variations of sunlight inten-sities, i.e. Macbeth color checker and wheat pl ant images. The images of the Macbeth color checker and wheat plant were captured under sunlight using common digital still camera. The image acquisition adopted the method used in our preceding research.3 There were 7872 RGB color samples from the Macbeth color checker for color normalization and 360 wheat plant im-ages for nutrient estimation. Color Normalization Training an Its Application to Wheat Plant Images In this step, we performed color normalization using an ensemble deep learning multilayer per-ceptron (DL-MLP) and then locally optimized the results by genetic algorithm using the Mac-beth color checker datasets. The developed color normalization aims to reduce color variability 17 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS produced by different light intensities. As show in Figure 1, the RGB information of the Mac-beth color checker was initially trained by using 24 DL-MLPs and combined using Macbeth color checker by both simple an weighted averaging methods. In order to attain better generalization perfor mance, deep learning MLP is required to extract more abstract and accurate information than can be obtained from shallow one. Each DL-MLP consisted of three hidden layers and three units of both input and output layers, which repre-sented red, green and blue color channels fro the Macbeth color checker. DL-MLP uses series of many layers (usually more than one hidden layer) of nonlin ear processing units. Each consecutive layer uses the output from the previo us one as input. Suppose that there is DL-MLP with hidden layers, the layer input activation for > with h(0)(x) x can be expressed as: (k) (k) (k) (k-1)a( )b h x =+ (1) where is layer activation, is offset vector (bias), is weight matrix, and is hidden layer output. The hidden layer activation k from to L) and output layer activation k L 1), thus, can be calculated as: ()()()()()kkg= hx ax (2) and ()()()()() ()L1 L1o++== hx ax x (3) respectively, where ()g⋅ and ()o⋅ are the sigmoid activation function. In the developed DL-MLP, each hidden layer is in itially pre-trained in an unsupervised way us-ing an autoencoder. After pre-training all the hidd en layers, each weight and bias value is subse-quently fine-tuned by supervised learning using backpropagation method. Basically, an autoencoder is feedforward neural network that will transform the input into more dense rep-resentation and rebuild the input with the learned representation.7 After autoencoding the first layer, the pre-traini ng process continues to the next hidden layer with the same method as previously described unt il the last hidden layer. Once all hidden layers are pre-trained, the next step is as follows: Add output layer Initialize W(L+1) and b(L+1) randomly as usual Train the whole network using supervised learning with backpropagation error algo-rithm. All networks’ weights are then adjusted for the supervised task. After training each DL-MLP, the next step is combining all 24 DL-MLPs into single network system using committee machines. By using this combination, the output value (see Figure 1) can be achieved by averaging the output Y, as follows: 123 4 2 2 4[, ,, [ ,,,, ]TZa Y Y Y=⋅= ∝ ∝ (4) The combination of several neural networks by committee machine is able to considerably im-prove the estimation results Suppose that there are expert systems to approximate target vector T. Each expert has output vector Oi and error ei, iiOT e=+ (5) Thus, the sum of the squared error for the i-th expert yi is ()2 2ii iE OT eξξ =− (6) where []ξ⋅ denotes the statistical expectation. 18 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent SUMMARIZATION OF THINGS The average error of each expert system Eave) is then 21111[]QQave iiiE EeQQξ==== (7) In other words, by using committee machine, the output value can be achieved by simply av-eraging the output vector ܱ, as follows: 11QiiYOQ == (8) Thus, the squared error of the committee machine ECOM) is ()2211211QQCOM iCMiiOiEYOQTET eQξξξ== =− =− (9) But, by considering Cauchy’s inequality, Eq. (10) and (12) is as follows: 221111iQQiiieeQQξξ== (10) Thus, we have COM aveE E≤ (11) which indicates that the committee machine gives more accurate and reliable estimations than any one of the individual neural network. We used two types of combiner, i.e. simple nd weighted averaging methods. The simple aver-aging method indicates that each DL-MLP has the same weight, ∝k, to produce the new output, Z. We also investigated the possibility that each DL-MLP has different weight, which was op-timized locally using genetic algorithm, as expressed in the following: ()241kkkZ Y==∝ (12) with 241kkI=∝= (13) Once the color normalization is accomplished, the ne xt step is to apply th developed neural net-work and the matrix to normalize wheat plant images. The wheat plant image has dimen-sion of 448 336 pixels. Through this developed color adjusting system, each pixel of plant image which was acquired under various light intensities is transformed to the equivalent pixel of the image under the standard light intensity, i.e. 50 Klux. Image Segmentation and Feature Extraction Image segmentation was conducted to remove any non-leaf images, such as soil, stones, weeds, dried and semi-dried leaves, and to keep the leaf images as the region of interest. We used DL-MLP for image segmentation to distinguish the wh eat leaves from other undesired parts. We es-tablished dataset of 4,800 samples of RGB color nd binary values (0 or 1) as the input and tar-get values, respectively. The dataset was achieved from 24 images, in which 100 pixels in the leaf region and 100 pixels in other parts of th region were selected manually from each image. The structure of the neural networ in this step is similar to the single DL-MLP used for color normalization. The output layer had only one unit, which signifies whet her each pixel is part of leaf or not. The output value of the networ was equal to if the corresponding pixel was part of leaf, otherwise, the value was 0. We used three hidden layers which were initially pre-19 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS trained unsupervised using the autoencoder meth od. The sigmoid activation function was used for both hidden and output layers. In the color segmented images, noise is minimized before extracting image features. Further-more, weeds were present in most of the plant images, which needed to be removed from the segmented images, as they affect the color information of the wheat leaves. To unravel this prob-lem, we developed an algorithm to remove unwanted images by selecting the largest part of the leaves which has the highest number of object pixels. Once the image segmentation is accomplished, several features of the segmented images were subsequently extracted. We extracted four types of statistical color moments of each RGB color channel, namely mean, variance, skewness, and normalized kurtosis, as these features can repre-sent color distributions of an image. Additionall y, the mathematical expressions of the features can be written as follows: ()() () ()11Pcc cipmean x xPμ=== (14) () ()22() () () () ()11variance varPcc c cipEx xPμμ=== = (15) ()()()3() ()2() ()32skewness )ccccExskew cExμμ−==− (16) ()()()4() ()()22() ()normalized kurtosis 3cccccExnormkurtExμμ−== −− (17) Where refers to each color channel (red, green, and blue) and is the number of object pixels. Nitrogen Content Estimation We developed combination of several standard MLPs with different hidden layer nodes using committee machine to estimate nitr ogen content. Each neural netw ork had twelve nodes of input layer which correspond to the statis tical moment features of red, green, and blue color and one node of output layer that repr esents the estimated nitrogen am ount. Additionally, the initial num-ber of hidden layer nodes was set to 18 nodes. To determine the initial number of hidden layer nodes, we modified the formula developed by Ward System Group8 as follows: ()0.52pLi LoLh τ+=+ (18) Where Lh, Li, and Lo are the number of hidden, input, and output layer nodes, respectively, while np is the number of input patterns in the training set (number of training samples), and is constant ()01τ<< After conducting many experi ments by trial and error, 0.25τ= is chosen. From this initial hidden nodes number, we genera ted number of new neural networks with vari-ous hidden layer nodes. The numbers of hidden la yer nodes with regards to these new neural net-works were produced using the following formula: new initLh Lh =× (19) where Lhnew and Lhinit are the number of hidden layer nodes of the new neural network and the initial neural network, respectively, and is the multiplication factor. In this paper, we used = 2, 3, …, 7. Basically, the number could be any number. The purpose of this multiplication factor is to produce new neural ne tworks with different hidde nodes. In this research, also denotes the number of neural networks combined by committee machine (up to neural networks). 20 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent SUMMARIZATION OF THINGS We estimated the nitrogen amount by applying committee machine. In committee machine, number of neural networks are combined to solve complex estimation task. The fusion of these neural networks can improve the estimation results significantly compared to results attained by any single one of the networks.9 We employed both simple and weighted averaging methods as the combiner of neural networks. The es timated nitrogen amount was obtained by the follow-ing formula: ()11 with 1QQqq qqqNv v==′=× (20) where N′ is the estimated nitrogen content, is the network’s weight, and q is the output of single network. In the committee machine with simple averaging method, the value of qν with = 1,2,…, is the same for all networks. In contrast, the value of qν is different for each neural network in the committee machine ith weighted averaging method. Global Network Optimization The final step of this research was to globally optimize the combiner weights, i.e. matrix [ () 12 2 4, , α=∝∝ ∝ and matrix () 12,,,Q νν ν= in the color normalization and nitro-gen estimation steps, respectively, based on the nutrient estimation error using genetic algo-rithm (see Figure 1). Basically, genetic al gorithm encompasses population with certain number of individuals. Each individual in population has the possibility of being the solution to the optimization problem. Hence, by applying selection, crossover, and mutation among individ-uals, new generation is produced. This process is repeated seve ral times until new individual provides the most appropriate solution for the problem. Two sequential GAs have been developed to achieve the best estimation results. The first GA was to optimize the matrix in the color normalization, whil the second was GA to optimize the matrix in the nitrogen estimation step. Based on our experiments, the developed DL-MLP fusion can be optimized using genetic algorithms with the following steps: 1. Define fitness function a. In this section, the fitness function of the developed genetic algorithm was to minimize the MSE between the actual ()N∗ and the estimated nitrogen content ()N′ of samples. ()2*' 1argmin sssNNS ∝− for color normalization step ()2* 1argmin sssvNNS′− for nitrogen estimation step 2. Determine initial population of chromosomes (P 0) a. We set the initial popul ation size of this gene tic algorithm to 1000 chro-mosomes (individuals) for both steps. These initial chromosomes per-formed as the first generation. 01000P= 3. Encoding a. Encoding is expressing each chro mosome in the population by the bi-nary strings of 0s and 1s. 21 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS b. In the color normalization step, the ]123 4, , α=∝∝ ∝ matrix has dimension of × 72 and every element of the matrix k∝ was expressed by 10-bit string of binary numbers (0s and 1s). Likewise, in the nitro-gen estimation step, each chromo some (individual) referred to neural networks’ weights 12,,,Q ννν ν= Each chromosome, therefore, was represented by × 10 bit strings. 4. Boundary conditions a. In both steps, we defined boundary conditions so that every element in the matrix and matrix has positive value. In particular, the boundary of each element of matrix k∝, i.e. ,ki ja with i, = 1,2,3, was set as follows: []k,ij,If thena0 1Else0ki jija=∈= a. Thus, each matrix k∝ has structure as follows: ,11,22,33000000kkkkaaa∝= (21) With = 1,2,3,…,24. 5. Reproduce next generations P1,P2,P3,…) by processing selection, cross-over and mu-tation operators a. In the beginning, each chromosome in the first generation (P 0) was tested by the fitness function to figure out how well it solves the optimi-zation problem. b. The selection operator attempts to give “a pressure” to the population as the same as similar to natural selection. Chromosomes (individuals) with better performance, or fitter, will be kept to the next generations. Otherwise, they will be wiped out. In cross-over, two chromosomes ex-change some bits of the same sec tion with one another to create two off-spring, while mutation turns over bits in chromosome (a to 1 and vice versa). c. The existence of mutation depends on the probability of mutation ()ρ set in the algorithm as well as random number given by the computer ()ω. In this step, we set the value was 0.005. The mutation operator was defined as follows: (occurs) if mutation =0 (not occur) if ρωρω≥ (22) 6. Repeat the selection, cro ssover, and mutation processes until the best chromosome is found. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In this study, we established three schemes of nitrogen status analysis based on the combiner type and the application of global optimization. In the first scheme, we used simple average combiner for color normalization and nitrogen es timation. Meanwh ile, the second scheme used 22 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent SUMMARIZATION OF THINGS GA-based weighted average combiner for color normalization with local-optimized matrix and simple average for nitrogen estimation. In th ese first two schemes, we did not apply global optimization. In the last scheme, GA-based gl obal optimization was applied to color normaliza-tion and nitrogen es timation to globally optimize matrix and matrix ν, respectively. To determine the effectiveness of the DL-MLP fusion for color normalization, we compare the proposed approach with various machine learning algorithms, i.e. gray world (GW), white patch (WP), linear regression (LR), sing le MLP and MLPs fusion. Base on our experiments, the pro-posed DL-MLP is superior to other color norma lization methods in term of Euclidean error ()RGBΔΕ which measures the color difference of output and target RGB values. The RGBΔΕ of GW, WP, LR, MLP, and MLPs fusion are 22.30, 13.74, 11.03, 4.85, and 4.10, respectively, while the RGBΔΕ of the proposed DL-MLP method is 3.67. The developed DL-MLP based color normalization using 24-patch Macbeth color checker can be applied to normalize plant images as well as to reduce color variability du to different sunlight intensities. In Figure 2, we how some examples of average RG standard deviation which were taken from 30 images from three fiel plots. As seen in the figu re, without color normalization, the color variability of plant images is very high as indicated by the average standard deviation of RGB color. It means that various sunlight intensities have considerable effects on the color of wheat plant images. Such images cannot be used directly for nutr ient estimation since they are not comparable. Theoretically, al plants from the same plot hould have similar color values since they are subject to the same fertilizer treatment. The color of the wheat leaves is considera-bly influenced by the nutrient amounts in the leaves, especially nitrogen. Figure 2. Comparison of color normalizati on results with three different schemes. By applying the developed color normalization usi ng scheme 1, i.e. simple average combiner, the standard deviation value, which is used as the parameter of color variability, can be de-creased significantly. However, the developed GA-based weighted average combiner can reduce the color variability more effectiv ely than the simple average met hod. This result indicates that each element in the matrix has different influence factor to each DL-MLP in the color nor-malization step. In addition, the effect of the local-optimized matrix to reduce the color varia-bility of wheat plant images is not quite differe nt compared to that of the global-optimized matrix α. In general, the global optimization (scheme #3), however, can reduce the average standard deviation of RGB color values slightly more than the local optimization (scheme #2). The developed DL-MLP based image segmentati on has successfully distinguished the wheat plants from complex background, such as soil, st ones, weeds, and other undesirable images. As 23 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS seen in Figure 3, the original wheat plants imag es (a) are firstly normalized using the developed fusion of DL-MLPs as shown in figures (b). Afte normalization, the wheat plants are then seg-mented and transformed into binary images (c) by means of DL-MLP ba sed image segmentation. Noise is subsequently removed by selecting the largest part of the images (d). The final step is putting back the RGB color of the largest part of the wheat leaves. Figure 3. Examples of DL-MLP based image segmentation results. The proposed global optimization is used to estimate nitrogen co ntent in wheat leaves. Figure shows the nitrogen estimation error is 0.0578, ccording to the SPAD mete r. The first developed research scheme with simple average combin er gave estimation results better than the SPAD meter based estimation. The best result based on this first scheme was obtained when using MLPs in the nitrogen estimation step. On the othe hand, in the second and third scheme, the best result was achieved from MLPs. This finding indicates that GA-based color normalization gives some effects to the extracted statistical colo features which were used as the inputs in the nutrient estimation step. Furthermore, the estima tion results using MLPs in the third scheme were slightly better than that in the second sc heme. This point denotes that each MLP in the ni-trogen estimation step has different weights ()ν as result of the developed GA. Based on our experiments, the best estimati on results can be achieved by using the following formula: ()61qqqNN ν=′=× []1234560.427 0.055 0.114 0.094 0.023 0.287NNNNNNN′=⋅ (23) 24 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent SUMMARIZATION OF THINGS Figure 4. Nitrogen estimation error using three different schemes. CONCLUSION The variation of sunlight intensities will domin antly affect the color of wheat plant images. Therefore, color normalization is required to tackle the effect of differing sunlight intensity by reducing the color variability of the images. The proposed method focuses on global optimiza-tion using genetic algorithm to normalize plant images that are subject to variation in lighting conditions in order to estimate nitrogen content in wheat leaves. The globally optimized deep neural networks fusion has given the best pred iction results compared to the other developed methods without global optim ization and the common SPAD meter based estimation. REFERENCES 1. S. Ivanov, K. Bhargava, and W. Donnelly, “P recision farming: sens or analytics,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 30, no. 4, 2015, pp. 76–80. 2. X. Yuanfang et al., “Study of monito ring maize leaf nutrition based on image processing and spectral analysis,” Proc. of IEEE World Autom. Congress (WAC), 2010, pp. 465–468. 3. S.B. Sulistyo, W.L. Woo, and S.S. Dlay, “Computational intelligent color normalization for wheat plant im ages to support precision fa rming,” Proc. of 8th IEEE Int. Conf. on Adv. Comput Intell., 2016, pp. 130–135. 4. O. Abdel-Hamid et al., “Convolutional ne ural networks for speech recognition,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 22, no. 10, 2014, pp. 1533–1545. 5. Y. Wang et al., “Optimal formation of multirobot systems based on recurrent neural network,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst ., vol. 27, no. 2, 2016, pp. 322–333. 6. P. Auearunyawat et al., “An automatic nitrogen estimation method in sugarcane leaves using image processing techniques,” Proc. of Int. Conf. on Agric., Environ. and Biological Sci. (ICAEBS), 2012, pp. 39–42. 25 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 7. H. Wang and D. Yeung, “Towards bayesian deep learning: framework and some existing methods,” IEEE Trans. on Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 28, no. 12, 2016, pp. 3395–3408. 8. Neuroshell 2, Ward System Group, 1998; http://www.wardsystems.com/manuals/neuro shell2/index.html?id xtutorialone.htm. 9. S.K. Ambat, S. Chatterjee, and K.V.S. Hari, “A committee machine approach for compressed sensing signal reconstruction,” IEEE Trans. Sign. Process., vol. 62, no. 7, 2014, pp. 1705–1717. 10. A. Süß et al., “Measuring leaf chloroph yll content with the Konica Minolta SPAD-502Plus,” EnMAP Field Guides Technical Report, technical report, GFZ Data Services, 2015. ABOUT THE AUTHORS Susanto B. Sulistyo is currently PhD candidate with Newcastle Univer sity, UK. His ma-jor research area is in computational intelligent signal and image processing. He received his M.Sc. degree in Agricultura Engineering Sciences from ogor Agricultural University, Indonesia. W. L. Woo is currently Reader in Intelligent Signal Processing with Newcastle Univer-sity, UK. His major research area is in mathematical theory and algorithms for nonlinear signal and image processing. He received his PhD from Newcastle University in the areas of higher order statistics and machine learning. Dr Woo is Senior Member of the IEEE. S. S. Dlay is currently Professor of Signal Processing Analysis with Newcastle University, UK. His major research is in image processi ng ranging from biometrics to biomedical diag-nosis. He received his PhD degree from the same institution in the area of signal processing architectures. Bin Gao is currently Professor of Nondestructive Testing with University of Electronic Sci-ence and Technology of China. His major res earch is in signal processing for NDT. He re-ceived his PhD from Newcastle University, UK in the area of signal processing. 26 May/June 2018 www.computer.org/inteligent